== Taxonomy 

Creating an app that will import a blastn output file and parse out and import the details.



---
=== Another piece of new info

mysql data type of "float" will accept small scientific notation, however, 2e-64 will be converted to 0.  
"Double" will hold it though.  I'm checking to see where the line is.  I need to change the data type
of the expect column.


Found this in a comment, but can't find it in any actual documentation.  
I am rather confused by the multiple ranges.

 DOUBLE[(M,D)] [ZEROFILL] holds double-precision numeric values, pretty similar to FLOAT double-precision, except for its allowable range, which is -1.7976931348623157E+308 to -2.2250738585072014E-308, 0, and 2.2250738585072014E-308 to 1.7976931348623157E+308.

 FLOAT[(M[,D])] [ZEROFILL] stores floating point numbers in the range of -3.402823466E+38 to -1.175494351E-38 and 1.175494351E-38 to 3.402823466E+38. If precision isn't specified, or <= 24, it's SINGLE precision, otherwise FLOAT is DOUBLE precision. When specified alone, precision can range from 0 to 53. If the scale is defined, too, precision may be up to 255, scale up to 253.


http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/numeric-type-overview.html
https://mariadb.com/kb/en/double/
https://mariadb.com/kb/en/float/

I'm not sure what the limits in ruby or sunspot would be, but I suppose that I should check.

Ruby seems to be ok down to 1e-323

 irb(main):016:0> 1e-323
 => 1.0e-323
 irb(main):017:0> 1e-324
 => 0.0


Sunspot seems to also be sensitive to float and double differences

 The dynamic column names are different.
 And they also seem to muck with the data when faceting




---
=== Confusion?

So, I've extracted all of the accession numbers, gi numbers and taxids from the nt database.
And I've blasted a fasta file to the nt database.
Yet there are a bunch of accession numbers in the blast output file that were NOT extracted.

For example, there are a number of matches to 3IZT in the blast output.

 > grep ">pdb|3IZT|" trinity_non_human_paired.blastn.txt | wc -l
 12

 > grep 3IZT trinity_non_human_paired.blastn.txt | head -1
 pdb|3IZT|B  Chain B, Structural Insights Into Cognate Vs. Near-Co...  71.3    2e-09

Yet, there is no extracted accession number 3IZT, but there are 3IZT_A and 3IZT_B.

 > grep 3IZT data/nt.accession_gi_taxid.csv 
 3IZT_A,326634209,83333
 3IZT_B,326634210,83333

What? Why?  





---
=== Imported Identifiers

Identifiers were extracted from the ncbi nt database (>26million)

 > blastdbcmd -db /Volumes/cube/working/indexes/nt -entry all -outfmt '%a,%g,%T' -out nt.accession_gi_taxid.csv


Recently, after blasting to the viral_genomics database, I found that all of the accession numbers didn't have associated identifiers.  This is apparently due to the viral_genomics database using REFSEQ data.  I tried to extract them from the database as I did for nt but found that this database doesn't include taxids.



ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/DATA/
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene2accession.gz



#Format: tax_id GeneID status RNA_nucleotide_accession.version RNA_nucleotide_gi protein_accession.version protein_gi genomic_nucleotide_accession.version genomic_nucleotide_gi start_position_on_the_genomic_accession end_position_on_the_genomic_accession orientation assembly mature_peptide_accession.version mature_peptide_gi Symbol (tab is used as a separator, pound sign - start of a comment)

sed -e 1d gene2accession | awk '{print $8","$9","$1}' | grep -vs "\-,\-" > gene2accession.accession_gi_taxid.csv &
sort
uniq

gene2refseq is just a subset of gene2accession

ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene2refseq.gz
sed -e 1d gene2refseq | awk '{print $8","$9","$1}' | grep -vs "\-,\-" > gene2refseq.accession_gi_taxid.csv &
sort
uniq

Unfortunately, these datasets have a number of problems which halt data importing.  A few missing gi numbers.  A handful of duplicate accession and gi numbers with alternate taxids.  I randomly removed some offending duplicates just to get the data imported.  I still have some blast data with no associated identifier.  I think that this may be due to different accession versions.  I don't quite get this either as I vaguely remember reading that every accession number gets a new gi number so all of the old ones should still be there.







gene2accession                                  recalculated daily
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
           This file is a comprehensive report of the accessions that are 
           related to a GeneID.  It includes sequences from the international
           sequence collaboration, Swiss-Prot, and RefSeq. The RefSeq subset
           of this file is also available as gene2refseq.

           Because this file is updated daily, the RefSeq subset does not 
           reflect any RefSeq release. Versions of RefSeq RNA and protein 
           records may be more recent than those included in an annotation
           release (build) or those in the current RefSeq release.

           To identify the annotation release/build to which the 
           genomic RefSeqs belong, please refer to the species-specific
           README_CURRENT_RELEASE or README_CURRENT_BUILD
           file in the genomes ftp site:

             ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/
 
           For example:
             ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/H_sapiens/README_CURRENT_RELEASE
             ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Ailuropoda_melanoleuca/README_CURRENT_BUILD            

           More notes about this file:

           tab-delimited
           one line per genomic/RNA/protein set of sequence accessions
           Column header line is the first line in the file.

           NOTE: Because this file is comprehensive, it may include
           some RefSeq accessions that are not current, because they are
           part of the annotation of the current genomic assembly. In other 
           words, the annotation of a genome is not continuous, but depends
           on a data freeze. Sub-genomic RefSeqs, however, are updated 
           continuously. Thus some RefSeqs may have been replaced or 
           suppressed after a data freeze assocated with a genomic annotation. 
           Until the release of a new genomic annotation, all
           RefSeqs that are included in the current annotation are reported
           in this file.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

tax_id:
           the unique identifier provided by NCBI Taxonomy
           for the species or strain/isolate

GeneID:
           the unique identifier for a gene

status:
           status of the RefSeq if a refseq, else '-'
           RefSeq values are: INFERRED, MODEL, NA, PREDICTED, PROVISIONAL,
           REVIEWED, SUPPRESSED, VALIDATED

RNA nucleotide accession.version:
           may be null (-) for some genomes

RNA nucleotide gi:
           the gi for an RNA nucleotide accession, '-' if not applicable

protein accession.version:
           will be null (-) for RNA-coding genes

protein gi:
           the gi for a protein accession, '-' if not applicable

genomic nucleotide accession.version:
           may be null (-) 

genomic nucleotide gi:
           the gi for a genomic nucleotide accession, '-' if not applicable

start position on the genomic accession:
            position of the gene feature on the genomic accession,
            '-' if not applicable
            position 0-based

            NOTE: this file does not report the position of each exon.
            For positions on RefSeq contigs and chromosomes, 
            use the seq_gene.md file in the appropriate build directory.
            For example, for the human genome,
            ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/H_sapiens/mapview/

            This file has one line for each annotation, with the feature name, feature_id and
            feature_type columns indicating the name and type of feature. Note that the GeneID 
            value in the feature_id column can be used to find all locations for a gene by GeneID.

            WARNING: Positions in seq_gene.md files are one-based, not 0-based

            NOTE: if genes are merged after an annotation is released, there 
            may be more than one location reported on a genomic sequence 
            per GeneID, each resulting from the annotation before the merge.

end position on the genomic accession:
            position of the gene feature on the genomic accession,
            '-' if not applicable
            position 0-based

            NOTE: this file does not report the position of each exon.
            For positions on RefSeq contigs and chromosomes, 
            use the seq_gene.md file in the appropriate build directory.
            For example, for the human genome,
            ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/H_sapiens/mapview/

            This file has one line for each annotation, with the feature name, feature_id and
            feature_type columns indicating the name and type of feature. Note that the GeneID 
            value in the feature_id column can be used to find all locations for a gene by GeneID.

            WARNING: Positions in seq_gene.md files are one-based, not 0-based

            NOTE: if genes are merged after an annotation is released, there 
            may be more than one location reported on a genomic sequence 
            per GeneID, each resulting from the annotation before the merge.

orientation:
            orientation of the gene feature on the genomic accession,
            '?' if not applicable

assembly:
            the name of the assembly
            '-' if not applicable

mature peptide accession.version:
           will be null (-) if absent

mature peptide gi:
           the gi for a mature peptide accession, '-' if not applicable

Symbol:
           the default symbol for the gene










OK then.  So.  Lots of little problems and gaps.  Downloading a newer blast nt database
along with human_genomic, refseq_genomic and other_genomic.  I'm going to extract
accession/gi/taxid from all and see if that works.

 update_blastdb.pl nt
 update_blastdb.pl refseq_genomic
 update_blastdb.pl other_genomic
 update_blastdb.pl human_genomic

 cat refseq_genomic.??.tar.gz.md5 > refseq_genomic.md5list
 gmd5sum -c refseq_genomic.md5list
 echo 'for file in `ls refseq_genomic.??.tar.gz` ; do tar xfzv $file ; done' | bash









---
=== Imported Nodes and Names

Nodes and Names came from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz
( I did not import all of nodes, or any of the other data. )
( I only use the scientific name, so next time I will only import those. )

 *.dmp files are bcp-like dump from GenBank taxonomy database.

 General information.
 Field terminator is "\t|\t"
 Row terminator is "\t|\n"

 nodes.dmp file consists of taxonomy nodes. The description for each node includes the following
 fields:
 	tax_id					-- node id in GenBank taxonomy database
 	parent tax_id				-- parent node id in GenBank taxonomy database
 	rank					-- rank of this node (superkingdom, kingdom, ...) 
 	embl code				-- locus-name prefix; not unique
 	division id				-- see division.dmp file
 	inherited div flag  (1 or 0)		-- 1 if node inherits division from parent
 	genetic code id				-- see gencode.dmp file
 	inherited GC  flag  (1 or 0)		-- 1 if node inherits genetic code from parent
 	mitochondrial genetic code id		-- see gencode.dmp file
 	inherited MGC flag  (1 or 0)		-- 1 if node inherits mitochondrial gencode from parent
 	GenBank hidden flag (1 or 0)            -- 1 if name is suppressed in GenBank entry lineage
 	hidden subtree root flag (1 or 0)       -- 1 if this subtree has no sequence data yet
 	comments				-- free-text comments and citations

 Taxonomy names file (names.dmp):
 	tax_id					-- the id of node associated with this name
 	name_txt				-- name itself
 	unique name				-- the unique variant of this name if name not unique
 	name class				-- (synonym, common name, ...)


---
=== Java Error

Getting ....

 RSolr::Error::Http (RSolr::Error::Http - 500 Internal Server Error
 Error:     Java heap space

 java.lang.OutOfMemoryError: Java heap space

How to get current value?

 java -XX:+PrintFlagsFinal -version

How to set new value?

 config/sunspot.yml allows for adjusting max and min


---
=== Java Version

I have found on my mac, the using Sunspot with Java 1.7 will cause all kinds of
random grief.


---
=== Running

sudo /opt/local/share/mariadb/support-files/mysql.server start

bundle exec rake sunspot:solr:start 




BlastResult.where(:file_name => "fallon_SFPB001B_filtered_20130731_trinity_non_human_single.blastn.txt").find_each{|b| b.delete }


BlastResult.where(BlastResult.arel_table[:id].gt(19895047)).find_each{|b|b.index}



---

Copyright (c) 2013 [Jake Wendt], released under the MIT license
